[proposal-draft] scaled-back MDX integration guide (#2060)
withastro/docs: src/pages/en/integrations/mdx.md

#### Inherited Plugins from `markdown` config

By default, Astro's MDX integration inherits all [remark](https://github.com/withastro/astro/tree/main/packages/integrations/mdx/#remarkplugins) and [rehype](https://github.com/withastro/astro/tree/main/packages/integrations/mdx/#rehypeplugins) plugins from [the `markdown` option in your Astro config](/en/guides/markdown-content/#markdown-plugins).

Any additional plugins you apply in your MDX config will be applied *after* your configured Markdown plugins, and will apply only to `.mdx` files.

This example applies [`remark-toc`](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark-toc) to Markdown *and* MDX, and [`rehype-minify`](https://github.com/rehypejs/rehype-minify) to MDX only:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import remarkToc from 'remark-toc';
import rehypeMinify from 'rehype-minify';
export default {
  markdown: {
    // Applied to .md and .mdx files
    remarkPlugins: [remarkToc],
  },
  integrations: [mdx({
    // Applied to .mdx files only
    rehypePlugins: [rehypeMinify],
  })],
}

> **Type:** `'markdown' | 'astroDefaults' | false`

Author: ```suggestion
### extendPlugins
When adding your own plugins, [GitHub-flavored Markdown](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark-gfm) and [Smartypants](https://github.com/silvenon/remark-smartypants) are removed. You can preserve these defaults in Markdown and MDX files with the `markdown.extendDefaultPlugins` flag.

To control extending plugins only in MDX, you can configure `.extendPlugins` in your `mdx` integration directly.

**Type:** `'markdown' | 'astroDefaults' | false`
```

```json title=".vscode/settings.json"
"files.associations": {
    "*.mdx": "markdown"
}
```

## Usage

Visit the [MDX docs](https://mdxjs.com/docs/what-is-mdx/) to learn about using MDX as a content authoring solution.

In Astro, you can [add MDX pages to your project](/en/guides/markdown-content/#markdown-and-mdx-pages) by adding `.mdx` files within your `src/pages/` directory. You can also [import `.mdx` files](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/markdown-content/#importing-markdown) into `.astro` files. 

## Configuration

Once installed, no configuration is necessary to use `.mdx` files in your Astro project. You may choose to extend or transform your Markdown with plugins.

### Markdown Plugins

#### Supported Plugins
Astro supports third-party [remark](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark) and [rehype](https://github.com/rehypejs/rehype) plugins for Markdown and MDX. [GitHub-flavored Markdown](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark-gfm) and [Smartypants](https://github.com/silvenon/remark-smartypants) are applied by default. 

> 
> **When adding your own plugins, these two default plugins are removed.** You can preserve these defaults with the [`extendDefaultPlugins` flag](#extendplugins).
> 
> You can browse [awesome-remark](https://github.com/remarkjs/awesome-remark) and [awesome-rehype](https://github.com/rehypejs/awesome-rehype) for popular plugins. See each plugin's own README for specific installation instructions.
> 
> #### Inherited Plugins from `markdown` config
> 
> By default, Astro's MDX integration inherits all [remark](https://github.com/withastro/astro/tree/main/packages/integrations/mdx/#remarkplugins) and [rehype](https://github.com/withastro/astro/tree/main/packages/integrations/mdx/#rehypeplugins) plugins from [the `markdown` option in your Astro config](/en/guides/markdown-content/#markdown-plugins).
> 
> Any additional plugins you apply in your MDX config will be applied *after* your configured Markdown plugins, and will apply only to `.mdx` files.
> 
> This example applies [`remark-toc`](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark-toc) to Markdown *and* MDX, and [`rehype-minify`](https://github.com/rehypejs/rehype-minify) to MDX only:
> 
> ```js title="astro.config.mjs"
> import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
> import remarkToc from 'remark-toc';
> import rehypeMinify from 'rehype-minify';
> export default {
>   markdown: {
>     // Applied to .md and .mdx files
>     remarkPlugins: [remarkToc],
>   },
>   integrations: [mdx({
>     // Applied to .mdx files only
>     rehypePlugins: [rehypeMinify],
>   })],
> }
> ```
> 
> ### extendPlugins
> 
> When adding your own plugins, [GitHub-flavored Markdown](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark-gfm) and [Smartypants](https://github.com/silvenon/remark-smartypants) are removed. You can preserve these defaults with the `extendDefaultPlugins` flag.
> 

Author: ```suggestion

**When adding your own plugins, these two default plugins are removed.** You can preserve these defaults with the [`markdown.extendDefaultPlugins` flag](#extendplugins) or with `extendPlugins` in your `mdx` integration config.

You can browse [awesome-remark](https://github.com/remarkjs/awesome-remark) and [awesome-rehype](https://github.com/rehypejs/awesome-rehype) for popular plugins. See each plugin's own README for specific installation instructions.

#### Inherited Plugins from `markdown` config

By default, Astro's MDX integration inherits all [remark](https://github.com/withastro/astro/tree/main/packages/integrations/mdx/#remarkplugins) and [rehype](https://github.com/withastro/astro/tree/main/packages/integrations/mdx/#rehypeplugins) plugins from [the `markdown` option in your Astro config](/en/guides/markdown-content/#markdown-plugins).

Any additional plugins you apply in your MDX config will be applied *after* your configured Markdown plugins, and will apply only to `.mdx` files.

This example applies [`remark-toc`](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark-toc) to Markdown *and* MDX, and [`rehype-minify`](https://github.com/rehypejs/rehype-minify) to MDX only:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import remarkToc from 'remark-toc';
import rehypeMinify from 'rehype-minify';
export default {
  markdown: {
    // Applied to .md and .mdx files
    remarkPlugins: [remarkToc],
  },
  integrations: [mdx({
    // Applied to .mdx files only
    rehypePlugins: [rehypeMinify],
  })],
}
```

### extendPlugins

When adding your own plugins, [GitHub-flavored Markdown](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark-gfm) and [Smartypants](https://github.com/silvenon/remark-smartypants) are removed. You can preserve these defaults in both Markdown and MDX files with the `markdown.extendDefaultPlugins` flag.

To control extending plugins only in MDX, you can configure `.extendPlugins` in your `mdx` integration directly.

```

> To control extending plugins only in MDX, you can configure `.extendPlugins` in your `mdx` integration directly.

Author: ```suggestion
To control extending plugins only in MDX, you can configure `.extendPlugins` in your `mdx` integration directly.

```

```sh
# Using NPM
npx astro add mdx
# Using Yarn
yarn astro add mdx
# Using PNPM
pnpm astro add mdx
```

If you run into any issues, [feel free to report them to us on GitHub](https://github.com/withastro/astro/issues) and try the manual installation steps below.

### Manual Install

First, install the `@astrojs/mdx` package using your package manager. If you're using npm or aren't sure, run this in the terminal:

```sh
npm install @astrojs/mdx
```

Then, apply this integration to your `astro.config.*` file using the `integrations` property:

**`astro.config.mjs`**

```js
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import mdx from '@astrojs/mdx';

export default defineConfig({
  // ...
  integrations: [mdx()],
});
```

Finally, restart the dev server.

### Editor Integration

[VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) supports Markdown by default. However, for MDX editor support, you may wish to add the following setting in your VSCode config. This ensures authoring MDX files provides a Markdown-like editor experience.

```json title=".vscode/settings.json"
"files.associations": {
    "*.mdx": "markdown"
}
```

## Usage

> Visit the [MDX docs](https://mdxjs.com/docs/what-is-mdx/) to learn about using MDX as a content authoring solution.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> In Astro, you can [add MDX pages to your project](/en/guides/markdown-content/#markdown-and-mdx-pages) by adding `.mdx` files within your `src/pages/` directory. You can also [import `.mdx` files](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/markdown-content/#importing-markdown) into `.astro` files. 

Author: ```suggestion
With the Astro MDX integration, you can [add MDX pages to your project](/en/guides/markdown-content/#markdown-and-mdx-pages) by adding `.mdx` files within your `src/pages/` directory. You can also [import `.mdx` files](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/markdown-content/#importing-markdown) into `.astro` files. 

Astro's MDX integration adds extra features to standard MDX, allowing you to use most of Astro's built-in Markdown features like a frontmatter `layout` property, a setting for draft pages, as well as default support for frontmatter variables.
```

This example applies the [`remark-toc`](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark-toc) plugin to `.mdx` files. To customize plugin inheritance from your Markdown config or Astro's defaults, [see the `extendPlugins` option](#extendplugins).

```js
// astro.config.mjs
import remarkToc from 'remark-toc';

export default {
  integrations: [mdx({
    remarkPlugins: [remarkToc],
  })],
}
```

### `rehypePlugins`

 Browse [awesome-rehype](https://github.com/rehypejs/awesome-rehype) for a full curated list of [Rehype plugins](https://github.com/rehypejs/rehype/blob/main/doc/plugins.md) to transform the HTML that your Markdown generates.

We apply our own (non-removable) [`collect-headings`](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/main/packages/integrations/mdx/src/rehype-collect-headings.ts) plugin. This applies IDs to all headings (i.e. `h1 -> h6`) in your MDX files to [link to headings via anchor tags](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/a#linking_to_an_element_on_the_same_page).

> This example applies the [`rehype-minify`](https://github.com/rehypejs/rehype-minify) plugin to `.mdx` files. To customize plugin inheritance from your Markdown config or Astro's defaults, [see the `extendPlugins` option](#extendplugins).
> 
> ```js
> // astro.config.mjs
> import rehypeMinifyHtml from 'rehype-minify';
> 
> export default {
>   integrations: [mdx({
>     rehypePlugins: [rehypeMinifyHtml],
>   })],
> }
> ```

Author: ```suggestion
This example applies the [`rehype-accessible-emojis`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/rehype-accessible-emojis) plugin to `.mdx` files. To customize plugin inheritance from your Markdown config or Astro's defaults, [see the `extendPlugins` option](#extendplugins).

```js
// astro.config.mjs
import rehypeAccessibleEmojis from 'rehype-accessible-emojis';

export default {
  integrations: [mdx({
    rehypePlugins: [rehypeAccessibleEmojis],
  })],
}
```
```

> ### `extendPlugins`

Author: ```suggestion
### remarkRehype
Options for `remarkRehype`. See [markdown.remarkRehype](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/configuration-reference/#markdownremarkrehype).

When `extendPlugins` is set to `'markdown'` (default), this config is extended with `remarkRehype` from Astro's default markdown config.

### `extendPlugins`
```
This is being PR'd as a new config option. Adding it here as a placeholder so I include it in my edit.

## Installation

### Quick Install

The `astro add` command-line tool automates the installation for you. Run one of the following commands in a new terminal window. (If you aren't sure which package manager you're using, run the first command.) Then, follow the prompts, and type "y" in the terminal (meaning "yes") for each one.

```sh
# Using NPM
npx astro add mdx
# Using Yarn
yarn astro add mdx
# Using PNPM
pnpm astro add mdx
```

If you run into any issues, [feel free to report them to us on GitHub](https://github.com/withastro/astro/issues) and try the manual installation steps below.

### Manual Install

First, install the `@astrojs/mdx` package using your package manager. If you're using npm or aren't sure, run this in the terminal:

```sh
npm install @astrojs/mdx
```

Then, apply this integration to your `astro.config.*` file using the `integrations` property:

**`astro.config.mjs`**

```js
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import mdx from '@astrojs/mdx';

export default defineConfig({
  // ...
  integrations: [mdx()],
});
```

> Finally, restart the dev server.

Reviewer: I guess we can remove this now that this happens for you?

```suggestion
```

Astro's MDX integration adds extra features to standard MDX, allowing you to use most of Astro's built-in Markdown features like a frontmatter `layout` property, a setting for draft pages, as well as default support for frontmatter variables.

Visit the [MDX docs](https://mdxjs.com/docs/what-is-mdx/) to learn about using MDX as a content authoring solution.

## Configuration

Once the MDX integration is installed, no configuration is necessary to use `.mdx` files in your Astro project.

### remarkPlugins

Browse [awesome-remark](https://github.com/remarkjs/awesome-remark) for a full curated list of [remark plugins](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark/blob/main/doc/plugins.md) to extend your Markdown's capabilities.

This example applies the [`remark-toc`](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark-toc) plugin to `.mdx` files. To customize plugin inheritance from your Markdown config or Astro's defaults, [see the `extendPlugins` option](#extendplugins).

```js
// astro.config.mjs
import remarkToc from 'remark-toc';

export default {
  integrations: [mdx({
    remarkPlugins: [remarkToc],
  })],
}
```

> ### rehypePlugins

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `rehypePlugins`
```

 Browse [awesome-rehype](https://github.com/rehypejs/awesome-rehype) for a full curated list of [Rehype plugins](https://github.com/rehypejs/rehype/blob/main/doc/plugins.md) to transform the HTML that your Markdown generates.

We apply our own (non-removable) [`collect-headings`](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/main/packages/integrations/mdx/src/rehype-collect-headings.ts) plugin. This applies IDs to all headings (i.e. `h1 -> h6`) in your MDX files to [link to headings via anchor tags](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/a#linking_to_an_element_on_the_same_page).

This example applies the [`rehype-minify`](https://github.com/rehypejs/rehype-minify) plugin to `.mdx` files. To customize plugin inheritance from your Markdown config or Astro's defaults, [see the `extendPlugins` option](#extendplugins).

```js
// astro.config.mjs
import rehypeMinifyHtml from 'rehype-minify';

export default {
  integrations: [mdx({
    rehypePlugins: [rehypeMinifyHtml],
  })],
}

> ```

Reviewer: We should change this! Didn’t notice it was also here when I made https://github.com/withastro/docs/pull/2025, but this does not work. We can probably copy over the changes I made there.

> ### extendPlugins

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `extendPlugins`
```

> **Type:** `'markdown' | 'astroDefaults' | false`
> 
> **Default:** `'markdown'`

Reviewer: Gut instinct is that we probably want a short generic description of `extendPlugins` before diving into the specific options. We don’t show type/default for the other options and I think the subheadings make this fairly obvious so maybe we can skip those?

```suggestion
You can customize how MDX files inherit your project’s existing Markdown configuration using the `extendPlugins` option.
```

### Manual Install

First, install the `@astrojs/mdx` package using your package manager. If you're using npm or aren't sure, run this in the terminal:

```sh
npm install @astrojs/mdx
```

Then, apply this integration to your `astro.config.*` file using the `integrations` property:

**`astro.config.mjs`**

```js
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import mdx from '@astrojs/mdx';

export default defineConfig({
  // ...
  integrations: [mdx()],
});
```

### Editor Integration

[VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) supports Markdown by default. However, for MDX editor support, you may wish to add the following setting in your VSCode config. This ensures authoring MDX files provides a Markdown-like editor experience.

```json title=".vscode/settings.json"
"files.associations": {
    "*.mdx": "markdown"
}
```

## Usage

With the Astro MDX integration, you can [add MDX pages to your project](/en/guides/markdown-content/#markdown-and-mdx-pages) by adding `.mdx` files within your `src/pages/` directory. You can also [import `.mdx` files](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/markdown-content/#importing-markdown) into `.astro` files. 

> Astro's MDX integration adds extra features to standard MDX, including support for Markdown-style frontmatter. This allows you to use most of Astro's built-in Markdown features like a frontmatter `layout` property and a setting for draft pages.

Author: ```suggestion
Astro's MDX integration adds extra features to standard MDX, including Markdown-style frontmatter. This allows you to use most of Astro's built-in Markdown features like a [special frontmatter `layout` property](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/markdown-content/#frontmatter-layout) and a [property for marking a page as a draft](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/markdown-content/#draft-pages).
```

[VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) supports Markdown by default. However, for MDX editor support, you may wish to add the following setting in your VSCode config. This ensures authoring MDX files provides a Markdown-like editor experience.

```json title=".vscode/settings.json"
"files.associations": {
    "*.mdx": "markdown"
}
```

## Usage

With the Astro MDX integration, you can [add MDX pages to your project](/en/guides/markdown-content/#markdown-and-mdx-pages) by adding `.mdx` files within your `src/pages/` directory. You can also [import `.mdx` files](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/markdown-content/#importing-markdown) into `.astro` files. 

Astro's MDX integration adds extra features to standard MDX, including Markdown-style frontmatter. This allows you to use most of Astro's built-in Markdown features like a [special frontmatter `layout` property](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/markdown-content/#frontmatter-layout) and a [property for marking a page as a draft](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/markdown-content/#draft-pages).

See how MDX works in Astro with examples in our [MD/MDX guide](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/markdown-content/).

> Visit the [MDX docs](https://mdxjs.com/docs/what-is-mdx/) to learn about using MDX as a content authoring solution.

Author: ```suggestion
Visit the [MDX docs](https://mdxjs.com/docs/what-is-mdx/) to learn about using standard MDX features.
```

import remarkToc from 'remark-toc';

export default {
  integrations: [mdx({
    remarkPlugins: [remarkToc],
  })],
}
```

### `rehypePlugins`

 Browse [awesome-rehype](https://github.com/rehypejs/awesome-rehype) for a full curated list of [Rehype plugins](https://github.com/rehypejs/rehype/blob/main/doc/plugins.md) to transform the HTML that your Markdown generates.

We apply our own (non-removable) [`collect-headings`](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/main/packages/integrations/mdx/src/rehype-collect-headings.ts) plugin. This applies IDs to all headings (i.e. `h1 -> h6`) in your MDX files to [link to headings via anchor tags](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/a#linking_to_an_element_on_the_same_page).

This example applies the [`rehype-accessible-emojis`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/rehype-accessible-emojis) plugin to `.mdx` files. To customize plugin inheritance from your Markdown config or Astro's defaults, [see the `extendPlugins` option](#extendplugins).

```js
// astro.config.mjs
import rehypeAccessibleEmojis from 'rehype-accessible-emojis';

export default {
  integrations: [mdx({
    rehypePlugins: [rehypeAccessibleEmojis],
  })],
}
```

> ### remarkRehype

Author: ```suggestion
### `remarkRehype`
```

You can use remark-rehype options in your config file like so:

```js
// astro.config.mjs
export default {
  integrations: [mdx({
    remarkRehype: {
      footnoteLabel: 'Catatan kaki',
      footnoteBackLabel: 'Kembali ke konten',
    },
  })],
};
```
This inherits the configuration of [`markdown.remarkRehype`](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/configuration-reference/#markdownremarkrehype). This behavior can be changed by configuring `extendPlugins`.

### `extendPlugins`

You can customize how MDX files inherit your project’s existing Markdown configuration using the `extendPlugins` option.

> 
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

import remarkToc from 'remark-toc';

export default {
  integrations: [mdx({
    remarkPlugins: [remarkToc],
  })],
}
```

### `rehypePlugins`

 Browse [awesome-rehype](https://github.com/rehypejs/awesome-rehype) for a full curated list of [Rehype plugins](https://github.com/rehypejs/rehype/blob/main/doc/plugins.md) to transform the HTML that your Markdown generates.

We apply our own (non-removable) [`collect-headings`](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/main/packages/integrations/mdx/src/rehype-collect-headings.ts) plugin. This applies IDs to all headings (i.e. `h1 -> h6`) in your MDX files to [link to headings via anchor tags](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/a#linking_to_an_element_on_the_same_page).

This example applies the [`rehype-accessible-emojis`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/rehype-accessible-emojis) plugin to `.mdx` files. To customize plugin inheritance from your Markdown config or Astro's defaults, [see the `extendPlugins` option](#extendplugins).

```js
// astro.config.mjs
import rehypeAccessibleEmojis from 'rehype-accessible-emojis';

export default {
  integrations: [mdx({
    rehypePlugins: [rehypeAccessibleEmojis],
  })],
}

> 

Author: ``````suggestion
```

``````

Author: missing end code block syntax
